thank you welcome to The New Yorker
festival I'm I'm gradual come this
afternoon if I if I'm counting correctly
I think this is my eighth consecutive
talk at The New Yorker festival which
means that if this festival had term
limits I would be finished it's good
it's an observation you can file under
how the world would be different if the
Tea Party took over this is a historic
speech for a number of reasons one is it
is the first time that I've ever given a
talk of the festival where my parents
were not in attendance so that means
that I the number of enthusiastic
responses I'm going to get is to at
least two less than the normal my mother
told me though that she if she were he
or she would almost certainly like what
I had to say but that's sort of cold
comfort because that is she's
substituting the illusion of empirical
enthusiasm for the dull certainty of a
priori enthusiasm know if I made any
sense but I am this is also stark for
another reason that is that in all of my
time giving talks in New Yorker festival
I have never I've always given a title
and never talked about what the title
was because you never know when you're
asked to give the title it's months
before the festival who knows what you
want to talk about but this is the first
time I've ever given the how to talk
that's actually what the title said the
talk was going to be so it is very
exciting for me that finally there is
truth in advertising I I couldn't want
to talk about the magical year 1975 now
what was magical about 1975 well there's
a long answer and as a short answer the
long answer is that if you look at the
transformation of American society that
has happened in the last generation or
so which is that we have gone from a
country that was among the most
the equal countries in the world to a
country that is now far and away not
only more economically unequal than at
any point in its history including the
guilded including the Gilded Age but
also more economically unequal than
almost any other westernized country so
that's the long answer is that this
extraordinary transformation in the
nature and shape of our society begins
on or about 1975 the short answer as to
why 1975 is a special year is connected
to the long answer and is simply it is
the year that talent started to get paid
and I'm going to address chiefly the
short answer as a way of answering the
long answer and I got interested in this
question of the magic year 1975 because
last summer I went to visit a man named
Marvin Miller now some of you will
remember who Marvin Miller is he is the
man who took over the major league
baseball players union in 1966 and he
led the union for the next 20 years or
so and for that period he was arguably
the most visible and well known and most
powerful union leader in the country but
I want to go one step further this
afternoon as I want to argue that in the
course of leading the baseball players
union Marvin Miller leads the
transformation of our economy in ways
both good and bad
now Miller is is still very much alive
he's in his 90s he lives in one of those
plain vanilla high-rises on the Upper
East Side and he's 100% sharp and he's
this little kind of wiry guy just as he
was back in the day remember they would
always be pictures of him you know in
that press conferences and Marvin Miller
will be here and then the players behind
him would be you know one and a half
heads taller than him and he still has
his little firm on two mustache and he
um he he grew up in Brooklyn he's I've
really always got that New Yorker that
Brooklyn honk in his in his voice to
this day and there's two things that are
important to know
marvin miller the first is that he is a
union man and i used that phrase in the
sense that it was has been used
historically in his country he is a kind
of person who rarely exists anymore
someone who grew up steeped in the
rituals and ways and traditions of the
trade union movement he he joined the
war he worked for the war labor board he
worked for one of the municipal unions
after that here in new york and then he
spends the bulk of his career long
before he gets to baseball
he is the chief economist for the united
steelworkers he's one of the most
powerful figures at one of the most
powerful unions in the world steel
workers at their height at about a
million and a half members and really
control one of america's most most
important industries and he is in the
room in all of the crucial steel
negotiations of the 50s and early
sixties including the steel strike in
nineteen sixty two or three or four when
right at the beginning of the Vietnam
War the steel workers threatened to shut
down the American steel industry and the
dispute is negotiated in a room at the
White House with Lyndon Johnson who
literally locks them in the room and
says I'll unlock the room the door when
you solve this particular problem so he
is this crucially important Union figure
and it even goes back to his his early
days he he one of the most formative
experiences of his childhood is as a
small boy at the beginning of the
depression he remembers he would take
the subway in from Brooklyn and go and
visit his father who sold ladies coats
on Division Street I'm gonna at a
department store and one day he's just a
little kid and he gets off the subway
and he sees this commotion ahead and he
walks closer and he realizes that it's a
picket line and his father is is walking
the picket line they're attempting to to
organize the workers at this particular
department store it's their retail
wholesale department store or Employees
Union and there's a long ugly strike at
the beginning of the of the Depression
his father's out for out of
for about two months and he remembers
one day being a sleep one night and
being woken up by his father who'd come
home late and his father had in his
hands a copy of the contract that they
had finally won from from from the
department store and to this day if that
was 80 years ago
Miller can recite from memory in perfect
detail every one of the provisions his
father won that day that's a union man
right it's the most important experience
of his of his childhood so he
understands the meaning of class
solidarity and class struggle the second
thing you need to know about Miller is
that he is tough as nails he is just
about the most formidable adversary that
you could ever imagine
I mean he's well into his 90s now and
he's quite physically frail but if I was
having a dispute with anyone in my life
ranging from my landlord to you know the
head of some sovereign nation he
literally would be the first person I
would call um he is he's the kind of
person who you want in your foxhole on
who you know will represent your
interests as aggressively and
intelligently as is possible he is not
the kind of person you would ever want
to cross his chief adversary when he's
head of the baseball union is the
Commissioner of baseball in those years
who was a man named Bowie Kuhn and Bowie
Kuhn represented the kind of feat East
Coast Ivy League bow-tied weak-willed
whiskey sipping you know Polo playing
person that Marvin Miller truly loathes
and Miller thought that Kuhn was a moron
I think justifiably and they have a
famous exchange where Kuhn who wanted to
be friends with Miller accused Miller of
failing to reciprocate his overtures of
friendship and Miller responds that he
doesn't think that Kuhn actually wants
to be friends he said Kuhn was trying to
pick my brains and there was scant
possibility of reciprocity in that
depart
so I go and see Miller just this summer
couple months ago and he tells me the
following story it's 1966 and he's taken
over the the baseball players union and
it's a mess it wasn't actually a union
in the sense that we understand a union
or a sense that Miller understood a
union it was a company Union it was a
kind of something the owners sort of set
up on behalf of the players which by the
way is Miller would repeatedly point out
was illegal contravened all kinds of
labor law in this country nonetheless
there was this little kind of wholly
owned subsidiary of the owners and they
basically told the players what to do
and they made them sign these outrageous
contracts and they gave there was no
grievance procedures they could
basically do what they wanted to do with
the players and the players make nothing
I mean they're making almost peanuts and
Miller can't believe it he is absolutely
stunned at the situation that the
players find themselves in and he tries
to convince them that they're being
exploited and he's like you know you
have to live this way right you can
generations of American workers have
stood up for their own rights you can do
the same and the players don't see that
I mean he's having a devil of a time
trying to convince them of their plight
from the player's perspective what
they're famous they're ballplayers they
get to eat steak every night for dinner
I mean they're small town boys from the
south who don't have a concept of what a
union is or any notion about how they
ought to be able to participate in the
boundless economic riches of the game
they think oh people are cheering me and
I get to play second base for the st.
Louis Cardinals right so Miller is
trying again and again to make this
point with them and he's not working you
know one time for example he used to
bring up the matter of baseball cards
the way that the Topps baseball card
company would work in those days is they
would go into the minors and they would
identify promising players and they
would sign them up they would they would
sign the get them players to sign over
their rights for five dollars five
dollars and if they made it into the
majors they would pay them a hundred and
twenty-five dollars a year and for that
one hundred and twenty five dollars a
year
they got complete ownership of all of
the photographing rights you know
statistic whatever any use they wanted
to make of the players image and they
owed the players no royalties whatsoever
it was they essentially owned the player
for 125 measly dollars and Miller would
say to these guys you know this is into
the 70s this was going on he would say
are you crazy
125 dollars why would you sign that
contract and the pair's would say you
know when I was a kid I used to collect
baseball cards and now they want to put
me on a baseball card that's what he was
dealing with so when one spring he's
making every spring he would make a tour
of all the baseball teams their spring
training sites that he's visiting the
San Francisco Giants and they had their
spring training in Scottsdale Arizona
and the center fielder of the San
Francisco Giants in those years was the
right fielder was a guy named Bobby
Bonds and Bobby Bonds was one of the
best players in baseball he was this
extraordinary combination of speed and
power and Miller knew what Bobby bonzes
salary was he knew all the players
salary and Bobby Bonds salary was a joke
he was being paid nothing despite the
fact he was this extraordinary player
this this this this exceptional town so
he says Tunip larry having a big meeting
with all the players he says I'm gonna
make a prediction and he points to Bobby
Bonds his son now all the players would
bring their children to spring training
and Miller knew Bobby Bonds his son
really well he was this little kid and
it was clear even at that point that
Bobby bonds his son was going to be
something special he had some rare that
same rare combination of speed and power
as his father so he points to Bobby
Bonds his son he says I'm going to make
a prediction if we can get rid of the
system that we have as we know it
then Bobby bonds his son if he makes it
to the majors we'll make more in one
season than his father made in his
entire career well who was Bobby Bonds
his son Barry Bonds right one of the
greatest players of his generation and
Miller was absolutely right in fact
Barry Bonds made more in one season than
the entire San Francisco Giants made in
there
entire career combined right 22 million
dollars he made in 2000 and 2002 that is
Marvin Miller's revolution that he took
players from Bobby Bonds to Barry -
Barry Bonds and I think that all of us
in this room and all of us in this
society are still dealing with the
consequences of that revolution so in
order to understand why Miller is such a
extraordinary figure I think it is
important to realize something really
crucial about the post warriors
something that we have forgotten I think
and that is that from the end of the
Second World War
through the early 70s high-level
professionals talented people people at
the top of whatever field they are in on
I mean CEOs investment bankers writers
artists singers athletes you name it
didn't make any money
I say no money I mean they made a
fraction of what they may make today and
their income relative to the average
income in America was falling so if you
look at baseball players for example
between the 1940s in the 1960s the both
the minimum the games minimum salary and
the game's top salary fell by 1/3 fell
by 1/3 but in that period in 1955
lawyers in this country made more than
four times the average salary average
American salary by the mid-50s they were
making 2.4 times the average salary
that's how much they had seen their
premium shrink in that period there's a
the president of DuPont testifies before
Congress in 1956 and he points out that
his take-home pay is exactly half what
his predecessor in the 30s had had taken
home and when if you read the credits
fascinating if you read the kind of
journalism about captains of industry
and people the top of their fields that
was written in the 40s and the 50s
what's amazing at about it is that
people the journalism is marveling at
how ordinary their lives are it's the
exact opposite of that kind of
journalism today right instead of seeing
pictures of these
extraordinary palaces that you and I
could never own they it's really it's
about the opposite it's about how
they're living in circumstances very
similar to the rest of us so this is
wonderful
1948 Wall Street Journal profile of a
guy they called mr. C who's head of one
of the CEO of one of the biggest
companies in the United States and he
the profile of this guy starts with the
reporters with him in a taxicab and the
guy after he pays the taxi writes down
the amount of the taxi in his expense
book this is the CEO of one of the
biggest country companies in the in the
country his after-tax income the guy
says it's got called mr. C's what he's
called him as in the story his after-tax
income was $36,000 a year and the year
before that his after-tax income had
been $21,000 a year so that put that in
view basically you add a zero to get
contemporary dollars so this was a guy
who was the head of one of the biggest
companies in the country and he was
making around three hundred thousand
dollars a year and he has this is the
quote from the article I love this is
right after the executive has said that
his big extravagant was the previous
year he had bought two cars but he'd had
to dip into his savings to afford it
because he couldn't make it out of his
salary he says my idea of fun would be
to have a swimming pool because the how
behind the house so I could take a dip
whatever I want but to build it I'd have
to sell a couple of my government bonds
I don't like to do that so I'm getting
along without the pool now if anyone can
find me a contemporary CEO of a fortune
500 company who is capable with a
straight face of uttering the phrase so
I'm getting along without the pool I
will give you a pool right so here's
another one this is from a Ladies Home
Journal article 1959 Ladies Home Journal
sends a reporter to hang out with a guy
named mr. O'Rourke who is again one of
the CEOs of the biggest of CEO of one of
the biggest companies in in the United
States and the reporter goes to this
Sinestro works house and suburbs of
Chicago and gets a tour of the house
given by the CEOs wife and it's a tan
room Georgian somewhere like in Winnetka
or something like that and the whole
article is about how
it's kind of dowdy and the furniture is
sort of old and the wife is constantly
apologizing that well we haven't been
able to afford a decorator and we don't
do this and they have a summer house but
is like a little cottage on a lake it's
sort of miscible and at the end of the
article the reporter interviews mr.
o'roarke the head of one of the biggest
companies in the country and he says I'm
the president of one of the larger
companies in the US yet chances are I
will never become a millionaire that's
the reality of the mid-50s now why do
they make so little money well one
reason is taxes back then are really
really high the marginal income tax rate
on incomes above $200,000 in that era is
over 90 percent right so whenever you're
trapped in a conversation with someone
in the Hamptons who wants to tell you
about how Obama is a socialist and
because he wants to let the Bush tax
cuts expire remind that person that one
generation ago people in his position
paid ninety percent marginal tax rates
on their income right but the other
thing that's almost more important is
quite apart from taxes salaries simply
weren't that generous back then for
professionals and there was a feeling if
you talk to economists in that era that
this was a permanent condition that the
way in which the American economy had
evolved had had the effect of severely
and permanently limiting the income paid
to a talent to people the top of the
profession and the reasoning was look
what happened the post-war era was that
the public education system the public
university system expanded dramatically
so all of a sudden they were now ten
people applying for that one scarce job
at whatever elite institution instead of
two and that just meant that elite
institutions could get by with paying
their people a lot less money there's
this great quote from a guy named
Roswell maggle who is a partner at
Cravath Swaine and Moore
vanna's now one of the toniest of the
law firms in in this country and he he
writes this extraordinary thing in the
mid-50s and it's basically about how he
thinks that corporate law is going to
die as a profession and the reason he
says is that they can't
pay their people enough and he says his
law firm this is a great quote can no
longer honestly assure promising young
men if they become partners they can
save money in substantial amounts build
Country Homes and Gardens for themselves
like their fathers and grandfathers did
and plan extensive European holidays he
thinks it's over right and then what
happens the world changes in almost it
seems like a flash taxes go down
salaries start to soar baseball players
become multimillionaires CEOs start
cashing enormous paychecks and even
bigger bonuses and huge amount of stock
options and the very same lawyers at
Cravath Swaine and Moore who one once
thought they could never build those
houses and take those vacations and save
that money begin building those houses
and taking those vacations and saving
all that money so why does that happen
well there's all kinds of different
explanations and many economists have
written about this and many political
scientists have talked about the shift
in the politics that made this happen
but the explanation that I love and the
one that I want to dwell on today is one
that was given by a guy named Roger
Martin who is Dean of the Rotman School
of Management University of Toronto who
wrote a really extraordinary article for
the Harvard Business Review a couple
years ago and he argued that it came
about this transition this
transformation because of a change in
sensibility on the part of the most
talented people in our society that they
came to realize talented people did that
what they possessed was rare was scarce
and that what capital possessed in other
words what the people running all of
these companies had was all of a sudden
abundant and people like those CEOs mr.
C and mr. o'roarke and people like
Roswell maggle woke up to what they were
worth I woke up and realized oh wait a
minute I can get a whole lot more money
than I've been asking for and who wakes
them up Marvin Miller Greg Stemm up and
when does he wake them up 1975
so Miller one of the very first meetings
that Miller attends in his new role as
union chief
is a meeting of the executive committee
of baseball which is all of the honchos
of the game and it's in Chicago and he's
going there and sits down in this big
room and he has a certain expectation
about what a meeting is from his days at
the yard co-workers and and he's he's
absolutely flabbergasted by what
happened the topic under discussion that
day was that the owners had decided to
change the rules by which they funded
the players pension system there had
been a system in place an agreement in
place between the owners and the players
going back for 10 years that said that
60% of the broadcast revenue from the
World Series was going to go into a pot
of money to fund the players pension
system but the owners in 1966 were about
to sign a huge new television contract
and that sum of money was going to grow
so large that the owners decided wait a
minute if we give them 60% of this
suddenly huge number we're gonna be
giving them twice as much money we're
not going to do that so we're going to
switch this whole system to a flat fee
and Miller who spent his whole life as a
negotiator on behalf of the interests of
Labor is waiting for the negotiation to
begin and there's no negotiation they
just announced it it's what they're
going to do and they look at him like
he's a potted plant like he's just some
person who's just sitting in a corner
taking up space and he's absolutely
like I said flabbergasted and he sits
there stunned not only that it's what
they're doing is illegal
it contravenes the labor law the United
States of America and there are lawyers
in that people in that room who had been
trained in labor law right chief among
them Bowie Kuhn and he looks at Bowie
Kuhn waiting for Bowie Kuhn to say
excuse me gentlemen you've just broken
the law Bowie Kuhn says nothing now
think about the situation that he's in
Miller has just taken over this pathetic
Union this union that was set up by the
owners so they could control it and he
doesn't have any staff he doesn't really
have any revenue any kind of budget at
that moment and he's up against the
owners and who are the owners of
baseball in 1966 these are some of the
wealthiest most powerful men in the
country and whenever the players in in
previous years had tried to
- - to do battle with the owners in
court they'd always lost in fact the
Supreme Court had ruled in favor of the
owners Congress had passed laws
exempting the owners something antietam
antitrust provisions they had all the
power right and not only that his own
union the players in his owning and
don't even understand what a union is
they think that their lives are
wonderful and they're being well treated
by the owners they don't even understand
it - sign away their rights for 125
dollars to the tops baseball card
company is a bad idea
this is a guy in other words who is in
an incredibly weak position what's he
going to do so what does he do well he's
Marvin Miller he fights back and what
happens he wins the minute he stands up
and says wait a minute you can't do that
you've just broken well I don't care how
much money you have I don't care how
many politicians you have in your pocket
I don't care what the Supreme Court has
said you have just broken labor law and
they go oh and they back down and then
he realizes wait a minute maybe I've got
more power than I realized
and so he goes back the next year and he
says from now on we're going to we're
gonna or we're going to negotiate
through a collective bargaining
agreement and they go okay
and he wins that round and then he says
I want arbitration for grievances and
for salary disputes and they go okay
and he wins arbitration for salary
screws and won over the years as he's
head of Union the the baseball version
he wins one concession after another and
slowly transforms this union until he
wins the biggest prize of all which is
free agency he finally wins the right of
a player after serving a certain number
of years in the league to be able to
negotiate for himself what play what
team he plays for right the single most
important moment in the history of Labor
Relations in baseball and what year does
he negotiate free agency finally for the
players 1975 now here's the crucial
thing about all this right over the
course of this period that he is utterly
transforming the play the face of the
game and
proving to these previously powerless
players that they actually had power and
they could participate in the largest of
the game he no one thought it was going
to be that easy everyone thought it was
going to be this long difficult
drawn-out attracted battle and the
stunning thing is just how simple it all
was how easy it was to push at capital
and have capital just kind of crumble at
one point Miller takes his players out
on the strike and it's over something
that in retrospect seems incredibly
trivial the there was a surplus in the
pension fund I'm up the players and the
players said look that's surplus why
don't you just put it back into the fund
and use it to pay for higher benefits
and the owner said no absolutely not
over our dead body right that is that
contravenes every principal
bluh-bluh-bluh-bluh-bluh so Miller says
all right we're going to strike it's the
first strike in the history of
professional sports and even Miller this
time thinks this one is going to be long
and bloody right the owners have dug in
their heels this is this is going to be
a tough one and he tells all the players
be prepared right and they're all they
go out there and they're solid and they
do the first strike in the history of
professional sports and they hunker down
for a lost baseball season and what
happens after 13 days
the owners fold like an accordion boom
by giving but there's a wonderful
summary of the new york times in the new
york times of the strike by leonard cope
it is an old sports writer of that era i
love this he this is his summary of the
strike players we want higher pensions
owners we won't give you one damn cent
for that players you don't have to the
money is already there just let us use
it owners it would be impudent imprudent
players we did it before and anyhow we
won't play unless we could have some of
it owners okay
now you have to imagine what that what
that what kind of signal that sent to
all of these professionals around the
country who had seen their incomes
falling ever since the end of the war
right they had seen their money they
were making go down and down and their
status sink lower and lower and they
look over a baseball and they see this
guy this little wisp wiry guy with a foo
Munchie mustache and a Brooklyn honk
take on the most powerful people in the
game of baseball and some of the
wealthiest people in the country and win
can you imagine what kind of an example
that set for other professionals who
were engaged in a very similar kind of
battle right right around the same time
that Miller is transforming baseball
there's a parallel revolution going on
literally up the street the Major League
Baseball Players Association was on 42nd
Street literally a few blocks away in
Midtown there is a parallel revolution
taking place in the publishing world and
the Marvin Miller of that particular
revolution is a man named Mort Jenga and
more Janklow is a corporate lawyer he's
practicing in New York Eddy has one of
his friends from college is William
Safire their old college buddies and
William Safire is this is a speech
writer for the Nixon White House and he
decides to leave after the end after the
72 election and he wants to write a
memoir and he calls up his friend Mort
he says I know you're not a literary
agent you've never done anything in the
literary world but you're my lawyer I
want you to sell my this memoir for me
so Janko says I'll write it it goes and
he sells the memoir to Lilia model right
and then nine months pass and William
Safire hands in the manuscript on time
to William Morrow and then
Jenko gets a call a couple weeks later
from the editor of William Morrow and
the other says you know what we don't
like it we don't think it works as a
memoir I'm sorry tell your tell your
friend bill that we're going to have to
pass on this one
and by the way we'd like our advance
back now that's the way the contracts
were written back then believe it or not
the the deal that was struck in those
years between publishers and authors was
if the publisher didn't deem the
manuscript it
prep table they got to ask for the money
back the claw back the money they'd
given you to write the manuscript right
it is as if after a year of work and a
new job you bus would come to you and
say you know what really wasn't happy
with your work this year I'd like you to
give me your salary back that's the way
it was
so what mill what gentler decides is
that he's going to fight first of all he
knows he knows the books not terrible
books great he knows the real reason
they want to do that is because of a
very funny little thing that happened
between the time he made that deal with
William Morel and the time the
manuscript was handed in and that funny
little thing was Watergate write that
but sapphire was unlucky enough to have
left the White House just before
Watergate and handed in his manuscript
after Watergate and no publisher wants
to publish a Nixon book without any
mention of Watergate right so they're
just trumping up this they trumped up
this thing about not liking the
manuscript all that was was they'd made
a bad an unlucky business decision and
he also doesn't like this fact that the
way the contract is written between the
talent the author and capital the
publisher totally is in favor of capital
he thinks that's crazy right so he
decides he's going to fight so he gets
sent to the law firm that represents
William Morrow which is firm Greenbaum
Wolfe and Ernst and the partner of that
law firm as a guy named Morrie Greenbaum
and as gentle describes it Greenbaum is
one of these classic era Socratic fourth
generation German Jews you know with a
little Penn Stater right here and
Janklow is like off the boat Russian Jew
so you can imagine the kind of dynamic
between them and Greenbaum just starts
to give him a lecture like he's 18 years
old bad you know he says you know you
have to understand young man you are in
it we are in the standards business you
can't force a publisher to publish a
book you know that's the way this book
this business has worked for hundreds of
years
and Jenko says look I'm not trying to
force the publisher to publish this book
I'm trying to force the publisher to pay
for this book like the contract says
right and he said I'm going to sue and
you know Greenbaum like the bane on his
forehead starts like popping out and he
turns to Janklow and said as of course
young man if you sue you will never work
in
down again right some Janklow sues what
happens he wins right he takes on
capital and capital crumbles and as soon
as that happened every major author in
town says wait a minute that's the guy I
want to be my agent
and with that newfound power Jenko goes
back and he rewrites the contract so all
of a sudden the balance of power between
authors and publishers shifts and
instead of the author being in the
position of just doing whatever the
publisher said finally they get real
rights right it's the exact same story
as the Miller story right the outsider
comes in and shakes things up and and
sets up on behalf of capital and stare
of talent and looks at capital and says
the way you're doing things is
unacceptable and capital which everyone
thought was impregnable crumbles well if
you look across American society in the
mid 70s you will see versions of this
story happen again and again and again
there's a private equity investor in the
mid 70s called Teddy Forsman and like
all private equity guys back then the
way he got paid was he set up a fund
with all of his investors and he took a
2% or one and a half percent management
fee and all of a sudden he wakes up and
he says to himself in 1975 I think I
deserve more I don't see how I should
just work from doing all the work I
think I should get 20% of profits to
which at the time seemed like an
absolutely outrageous request but when
he went to all of his investors and said
I want not just 2% of manage of
management fee i won 20% of profits you
know what they said sure right and all
of a sudden now every single hedge fund
guy in private equity person in this
entire country gets 2 and 22% of
management 20% of profits in Hollywood
same period
mid-seventies guy named George Lucas
right goes to 20th Century Fox and says
I've got this movie called Star Wars you
may only know the interest did it but if
you are if you do want to make it I have
a simple request I would like you to
give me full ownership of every single
sequel to this movie an outrageous
request one that no one had ever made
before
or of capital in Hollywood and what does
20th spot 20th Century Fox say
sure we'll give it to you Zacks a mere
supermodel named Lauren Hutton she gets
sick of the fact that like all
supermodels she's making 60 bucks an
hour
and doesn't have any kind of contractual
relationship with anyone so she goes to
her photographer Richard Avedon and
they're working at that moment on this
camping with Revlon and Revlon really
really loves her and she says if they
love me so much they ought to pay me
properly hey you got to give me a real
contract and all of a sudden she goes
from making 60 bucks an hour to making
twenty five thousand dollars a day right
now where did she get the idea for that
well this is what she said in an
interview last year in vogue I read an
article about a sports guy named catfish
hunter on the bottom right-hand corner
of the New York Times front page it said
he was going to get a million-dollar
contract
I yelled over to my boyfriend and asked
how do I get a contract like that now
who was catfish hunter
catfish hunter was a pitcher for the New
York Yankees he was the first free agent
created by Marvin Miller's Revolution he
was the first millionaire in baseball
created by this new age this new
transformation the Miller brought about
right so you start with Marvin Miller
and you go to Mort Janklow and you go to
Teddy Forsman and you go to George Lucas
and you go to Lauren Hutton and then
where do you go from Lauren Hatton back
to Marvin Miller and when does it all
happen 1975 so what's going on here what
is what causes this transformation in
1975 that allows so many different
people to start demanding more from the
institutions that they that they work
with well there's a two economists name
checker and hastily well this really
lovely paper last year trying to explain
this and they draw on the work of an
anthropologist named Alan Fisk and Fisk
is a guy who famously has argued that
when people people use one of for what
he calls relational models when they
interact with one another so the first
kind of
relational model is what physicals
communal sharing and that's a you know
group of roommates in a house who all
read each other's books and listen to
each other's music and share each
other's socks right that's obvious the
second model is a quality matching and
that's tit for tat so a carpool is a
quality matching I Drive your kid to
school on Monday you drive my kid to
school on Tuesday right
the third is market pricing supply and
demand we negotiate the terms of our
relationship according to what the
market allows permits right and the
fourth relational model is Authority
ranking that's paternalism that's where
we have someone who we look up to who we
allow to make decisions on our behalf
that kind of has that kind of
paternalistic relationship to to our
rights and obligations and so what this
says is we use these models in various
ways according to tradition ritual
circumstance experience and we use a
variety of them right we shift from one
model to the other so he says imagine a
dinner party you buy the food at a store
according to a price that's determined
by the market that's market pricing you
some of the people you invite to your
house for dinner because they have
invited you to their house for dinner in
the past right that's a quality matching
when people arrive you set all the food
on a sideboard and they all serve
themselves
that's communal sharing but they sit in
the seat that you assign you decide that
you want Mary next to Jim and Jim next
to Helen right that's Authority ranking
now so in one dinner party we use for
all four different relational models now
imagine if we just shift the relational
models just a little bit imagine if you
were to use a quality matching for to
get your food what imagine if you just
made a you would done a favor for
someone at Whole Foods last week and in
return they give you some food for their
you say you said on me they all
advertise Whole Foods on my website and
in exchange they give you some food for
free right now imagine if you did
communal sharing for your
our invitations you just said to friends
invite whoever you want right let's all
imagine if you did a thority ranking for
the choice of what to serve you said
we're all going to have chicken pot pie
right that's it and imagine if you did a
market pricing for this for the for the
invitations people would pay to come to
your dinner party now you could have the
same guest list and the same food and
the same venue on the same day at the
same time but merely by changing the
nature of your of your social relations
right you have turned a private dinner
party into a community fundraiser that's
how profound these sort of relational
models help profound an impact these
kinds of relational models have on the
way that we order our universe when you
shift from one kind of relational model
to another you bring about an
extraordinary transformation in the
nature of the transaction and the nature
of your relationship with the people
that you're working with and what check
our house we say is when you look at
what happened in the 1970s in 1975
that's what you're seeing
we had a shift in relational models we
went from authority ranking to market
pricing right and that simple shift had
the effect of fundamentally reordering
our world so think about baseball along
these lines the really big thing that
Miller defeated in his time as the head
of the Union was what was called the
reserve clause and the reserve clause
was a line in the contract that every
baseball player had to sign that said
essentially that the baseball team that
you signed with owns your rights in
perpetuity so if you sign a contract
with the New York Yankees at the age of
17 that you the New York Yankees own you
you cannot play for anyone else the only
way you can obey for anyone else is if
the New York Yankees decide to fail your
contract to someone else essentially
it's a kind of legalized slavery you
have no freedom of movement and now when
Miller comes along in the mid-60s
that's what outrages him about baseball
that's what he can't believe right he
walks into the system and he
sieze oh my goodness all these guys I'm
representing have signed over their
freedoms to the teams they play for and
by the way is not just when you do when
you sign the reserve buzz it doesn't
just rob you of your freedom it robs you
of your bargaining power how on earth do
you negotiate a higher salary if you
cannot play for any other team right the
only threat you can make is to quit you
can't say I'm going to go across the
street and play for the for the Brooklyn
Dodgers right because they'll say you
can't no I own you in perpetuity so he
tries to explain to the players right do
you guys realize what you've done by
signing this you have made it impossible
to ever negotiate a proper contract do
you ever get paid for your true value
and the players don't get it and that's
what he's been he's beating his head
against the wall in the early days what
he's trying to do is to convince the
players to see this right to see the
extent to which they are being exploited
by this by this system well why don't
they see it why is it so hard because
they are in the grip of Authority
ranking because they have used that
relational model to define their terms
of engagement with the owners they have
decided look this is paternalism the
owners take care of me
they buy my steaks after dinner they
slip me $20 when I play really well they
allow me to play second base and they
clean my union uniform after I'm done
this is a great system right I get to do
the thing I love play baseball and they
do all the worrying about how much I
should get paid and where I should go
and what Miller is trying to do is to
get in the ship to market pricing and
that's a really hard transition it seems
simple but in fact it requires this
extraordinary leap from one model to the
next now if you look how what was going
on in the professions prior to 1975 you
see authority ranking all over the place
that was the the reason why
professionals were getting paid so
little in those years because they were
passively adopting a set of standards
and expectations that was set by the
institutions that they worked for this
is wonderful book I read two years ago
by um Charles Ellis it's a book about
Goldman Sachs
history of Goldman Sachs he tells a
story of Sidney Weinberg who is the guy
who really builds that firm into the
Colossus that it's become he runs
Goldman Sachs from 1930 to the end of
the 60s and is an incredible passage
which I'll never forget which is that
Weinberg is in the mid-50s he's tapped
to lead the initial public offering of
of the Ford Motor Company to take Ford
Motor Company public it is the biggest
IPO in history up to that point and if
you adjust the dollar amounts it's the
biggest IPO of all time it's an
incredible when we're talking about Ford
at the height of its power right it's it
equivalent of Microsoft and IBM and
Apple and Google going public
simultaneously by a massive thing and
they want Sidney Weinberg and Goldman
Sachs to do the deal to represent them
so there's his the crucial passage when
Ellis is describing what happens in that
deal when Henry Ford had asked Weinberg
at the outset what his fee would be
Weinberg had declined to get specific
he offered to work for $1 a year until
everything was over and then let the
family decide what his efforts were
really worth far more than the actual
fee Weinberg always said he appreciated
an affectionate handwritten letter he
received from Ford which says along with
other flattering things without you it
could not have been accomplished
Weinberg had the letter framed and hung
in his office where he would proudly
direct visitors attention to it saying
that's the big payoff as far as I'm
concerned he was speaking more literally
than his guests knew the fee finally
paid was estimated at the time to be as
high as a million dollars the actual fee
was nowhere near that amount for two
years work and a dazzling success the
indispensable man was paid only 250,000
dollars now let us go over point by
point that surreal packet passage from
just fifty years ago one he asked for a
dollar a year
is there a banker on the face of the
earth today
who would agree to be paid a dollar a
year at the outset of a transaction and
just let the client give him whatever
bonus he wanted right to a thank you
note
is there a banker on the face of the
earth today who would say point to a
thank you now handwritten thank-you note
as well and say that's the payoff as far
as I'm concerned
point number three two hundred and fifty
thousand dollars for handling the
biggest IPO in human history today that
fee would be I don't even know other
many bankers in the room not maybe 250
million maybe two billion I don't know I
mean today it would be many many
multiples of that that fee is so low
it's unbelievable it's I mean it's
mind-boggling
that you could work on a deal the
biggest deal in history for two years
and get paid 250 grand and not complain
about it you know think about this
gentleman Weinberg is the most important
banker of his era he is the single most
powerful man on Wall Street he did that
deal because Ford came to him and begged
for him personally to handle it he has
all of the negotiating power in the
world right today in that same position
he could have cut the most lucrative
deal ever given an investment bank in
history but he doesn't on why doesn't he
because he's in the grip of authority
ranking because his assumption is it as
an investment banker he works for the
client he works for for and he is
obliged to take whatever for gives him
right whether it's five dollars or five
million dollars and whether it's a pat
in the back or a handwritten note what
has changed today in that world is not
simply that there is an extra zero or
two zeros on the end of any one of those
deals what's changed today is that
investment bankers are no longer in the
grip of authority ranking right now they
believe in market pricing they assume
that everything's up for negotiation
and that's exactly what the nature of
that transaction that disagreement was
between more Janklow and maori Greenbaum
maori Greenbaum assumed as he you know
glared at
his Benson a he assumed that the order
of the social relations in the
publishing world was a thorough knee
ranking right that the social relations
were settled that everybody was an
agreement on that's what the model was
and general is saying no it's not
settled let's do market pricing right I
think that's fair that's what that
disagreements about and when Teddy
Forsman comes along and says I want 20%
of profits not just 2% of fees under
management he's not saying that because
he's somehow more acquisitive or or
rapacious than other equity fund
managers who come before him it's
because he's got a different model he
says why should I just passively accept
the terms that investors had been
offering for years and years and years
it's open to negotiation I want 20% and
if you say yes great and if you don't no
big deal
go somewhere else same thing a Lauren
Hutton is saying she's saying why do i
why should i passively take 60 $12 an
hour if Revlon likes me so much they
gotta pay for me right I'll work for
them but they ought to pay what I what I
what I'm really worth in this
marketplace which is twenty five
thousand dollars a day and she gets
twenty five thousand dollars a day well
that is the modern Miller Revolution
he's bringing market pricing to places
where market pricing had never been
considered as an option before so to the
crucial question and that is is this a
good thing
are we better off for having transformed
the professional world by using the
prism of market pricing well in one
sense the answer is yes of course we're
better off right the old system was
exploitation there's no reason why the
baseball owners should keep all the
money or why Ford should get away with
paying peanuts for that IPO or why
Lauren Hutton should work for 60 bucks
an hour and that's that that is them
that is the the great part the powerful
and useful and lasting contribution that
Miller makes is he begins to even the
scales to make sure that society
properly appreciates
the contributions of people who have
exceptional abilities but there's a
another part of this that's more
complicated and that is that what Miller
was doing is he was taking a model that
had been tried out in the world of
organized labor right market pricing and
an end to Authority ranking is what the
trade union movement was all about right
that he they figured out way back when
50 years before the professionals did
that if you organize collectively and if
you were consistent and stood firm in
your demands you could get a lot more
money right and the history of the steel
workers and the auto workers in the
Teamsters through the 30s and 40s and
50s and early 60s is a testament to that
fact and what Miller does is he says
look this idea worked so well in the
ranks of the working class let's try it
in the professional class and so he
convinces professionals to think in that
moment like trade unionists right to
understand that let's test our pay in
the marketplace not according to some
kind of custom or ritual but the thing
is there's a huge difference between
trade unionism in the working class and
trade unionism in the professional class
people who are in trade unions are
people who don't have significant
financial or social resources they're
people whose skills are not necessarily
exceptional to people who can be
replaced by their company if they
threaten to walk across the street they
need that kind of collective
organization in order to have a fair
fight with capital but professionals are
different they do have significant
financial and social resources they do
have exceptional talents and when they
threaten to go across the street it's a
real threat because they're really
really hard to replace and so when they
organize collectively is not a fair
fight anymore it's a route on what
happens in baseball after Miller brings
about his revolution is around all of a
sudden talent doesn't goes from making
this much to making this much right the
share of baseball unions of baseball
revenues given Oh
- players salaries goes from 10% in the
60s to upwards of 60% by the early 1990s
Barry Bonds that little boy who was
playing at his father's feet back in the
early 70s makes 22 million dollars in
2004 which is not just more than his and
father's entire team made in their
entire career combined that's more than
many owners made in 2004 that's the big
question left by Miller's Revolution and
that is in bringing about this
transformation and then bringing about
market pricing do does the balance tip
too far in the favor of talent of talent
and when you look around and you see
that growing gulf between the top 1% of
this country and the rest of us and you
see that widening inequality and you see
the extraordinary salaries paid by
people on Wall Street you have to ask
yourself is this because of Miller's
revolution is this the unintended
consequence of freeing us from the
shackles of authority pricing you know
when Robert Nardelli leaves Home Depot a
couple years ago when he is I should say
forced out by the Board of Home Depot
because they were unhappy with its
performance he takes home a severance
package worth 210 million dollars now
why does he take home that much money
because he wrote that into his contract
when he was hired and why on earth would
you write into a contract when you hire
somebody that in the event that we
forced you out because we don't like you
and think you're terrible we'll still
pay you 210 million dollars why because
that's the situation a capital is in now
they can't say no to talent anymore it's
not a fair fight it's a rout you have to
do what talent says even when it turns
out the talent isn't all that talented
you know the problem with the old system
of authority ranking was arrogance at
people at the top people who were in
that position of authority abused their
privilege and made demands on those who
work for them that were outrageous but
the new system has a problem as well and
that's greed that people who has this
kind of power to demand salaries demand
far more than they
should there's a wonderful phrase that
Roger Martin says he says we have the
professional class has gone from asking
the question how much is enough to ask
any question how much can I get when I
was talking with Marvin Miller I was
reminded of this famous story about Stan
Musial
and Stan usual was a player who came
along in the generation before Marvin
Miller and he was one of the great
baseball players of his era and one
season he has so late in his career he
has one of his worst seasons as a
baseball player terrible season he hits
75 points below his average and so he
goes to the owners of the st. Louis
Cardinals and the general manager of his
team and he says I think you should cut
my pay by 20% he was making a hundred
thousand he said I think I should you
should cut it back copy back to 80
percent now I know what Marvin Miller
would say if you told him that story
he'd be outraged by it
he'd say first of all at a hundred
thousand dollars usual was being
underpaid by several orders of magnitude
he would also say and do you really
think that if usual had the greatest
career of his season the team would have
turned around and given him an extra
twenty percent no way right and in both
cases Miller would be absolutely right
in pointing to the fundamental
unfairness of that system but it's
really hard to look around today at all
of these billion dollar pay packages of
hedge fund people in all the private
jets landing one after another at
Teterboro and the massive palaces being
built by the new princes of our gilded
age and not feel just a little bit
nostalgic for what Musial said when he
was asked to give an explanation for why
he asked for that pay cut it has been a
very long time since anyone any kind of
talent said something like this usual
said there wasn't anything noble about
it I had allows a year I didn't deserve
the money
we have um we have time for questions I
think there are microphones at the top
of the aisle and I would be happy to
sure good I like coming to listen to you
and it's a little bit of an event and I
think of you as a little bit of an icon
as well coming here and compared you
somewhat to Steve Jobs who's also an
icon at richer yes and so your talk is
like well is it going to be like the
next iPhone that's how I think of your
next talk so I'm wondering what kind of
pressure is there in coming up with the
ideas for your next talk Oh what do I
have neuro C's involved in the thinking
this up well you know anyone who is in a
creative field is aware that you never
never escape the anxiety about whether
you where the next idea is coming from
or if in fact you'll ever have another
idea
and we were yesterday I was doing up a I
did a talk with Bill Simmons the squash
writer at the festival and we were
talking about this whole question of how
long do you have I how long how long a
stretch to create people have where they
can perform at a high level and Bill was
arguing that it was nine years I don't
know where he got number nine years but
and I was there thinking when did I
start and so I think I'm I'm probably
outside of my envelope so what I'm
saying is this all downhill from here
that was great so what do you attribute
the willingness of capital and perhaps
the willingness of the masses to change
so dramatically so quickly to
market-based pricing yeah well this is
an interesting question there's a number
of different Roger Martin whose work I
mentioned he wrote this piece for the
Harvard Business Review and his argument
is it's both a change in sensibility
that is to say talent changes its
position but there's a fundamental
economic piece as well which is that the
reason capital had such power for so
long was the capital was scarce there
wasn't a lot of money the big thing that
that if you had access to capital if you
could put together money to buy start a
business you were in an incredibly
powerful position because very people
had at that kind of access and what
happens in the 60s is the amount that
kind of pooled money available for new
business ventures grows dramatically and
that means that destroys the bargaining
position of those who organize pools of
capital so in baseball he would say
correctly that Miller comes along
precise at the time has the television
revenues for the baseball are exploding
and it becomes really really hard for
the owners to claim that they get 90
percent of everything when the pot is
suddenly ten times larger so there is
that piece of it and that's happening
simultaneously in all kinds of different
worlds you know that there there's a
creation of a mass market in the 60s
that allows talent to cash in but I
think it's very important not to give it
just simply a structural explanation
that I do think that that the shift from
one relational model to another which
seems inconceivable like when you're
trapped in authority ranking you can't
even conceive of market pricing but the
minute you see at work authority ranking
just kind of vanishes
you can't go back right it to me it's a
good example of when does discipline in
a classroom break down when authority
ranking disappears and you go to market
pricing or when you go to I mean any
number of the other relational models in
a classroom are disastrous communal
sharing
quality matching if you're not good ways
to so I just think there is that I just
think there's something so dramatic
about that change in perspective and it
just kind of it just runs through the
professional ranks like a contagion in
1975 I have two questions for you
one 1975 is also the coming of age of
the very beginning of the baby boomers
and very close to the Year 1977 when
Marshall McLuhan made the very famous
statement that it used to be in America
that when someone would notice that
someone was able to get a son or a
daughter into a position by connections
as opposed to talent people would be
outraged people would stand up in and
protest whereas as of 1977 people were
saying how could I get my son or my
daughter into that so he was seeing a
destruction slow destruction of values
in the United State the second question
I have so my first question is how do
you relate this excessive emphasis on
talent and the power of talent to the
minami baby boars coming of age and
secondly that generation is now heading
into retirement and some of them are
already there what do you think the next
generation of Americans are going to
present as a model for not only the
market but also for human values yeah
two good questions to the first I'm
going to answer it narrowly I do think
there's obviously a piece of this it is
not coincidental that all this happens
you're right as the baby boomers are
gaining positions of authority in the
workforce the middle of the me decade
more crucially though I remember asking
middle of this I said you know the
arguments he was making about baseball
players and their rights were powerfully
analogous to the arguments being made in
the civil rights movement of the same
era of the 60s and so I said I remember
asking like well is that was that
shoo did you find that the black players
in baseball were more open to this
message than the white players he said
absolutely
in fact he began to list so many of the
key figures in the baseball union were
were black and they absolutely saw a
connection between their okay oh the
broader a much more important struggle
in society and this little microcosmic
struggle on that they were involved in
so there is a kind of leakage of values
of values from outside into these
professional ranks the other questions
really go into what kind of relational
model do we think that people will hold
today I suspect that what we still have
a talent focused model but what talent
wants today is not to get paid because I
don't think they I think they realize
they can't get paid in the same way I
think what they want is to be free in a
sense of what they're looking for is
autonomy is the freedom to do to behave
as creatively in in whatever ways they
wish without the constraints of
institutions or that's the kind of gear
that's their version of the market
pricing paradigm trade the money yeah
cuz going to express himself yeah cuz no
one I mean the generation that's 25 and
below are making in many cases a
fraction of what their predecessors made
now cycle is not coming other way
because money is gone - okay you
describe it as kind of a paradigm shift
from the authority ranking to the market
pricing model I was wondering if perhaps
there are all of those all of those
paradigms were were happening
simultaneously not just not just from
from A to B because for instance you've
got CEOs who are on confidence you know
who are now also on the boards of the
companies and chairmen of the companies
and on the compensation committees for
the companies are they doing Authority
ranking for their own salaries is it a
equality matching for their fellow you
know for their cronies on other boards
and things like that yeah no you're
right so it gets tricky and then this
some version of my
will appear in the magazine and I deal
with these article that with your point
a little more I flesh it out a little
more in in the magazine but I think
you're right so what happen what happens
to market pricing is it that would say
CEO pay is it gets completely corrupted
market pricing assumes that there is a
negotiation between relatively equal
parties and what you're seeing when Nora
delegates 210 million dollars for being
fired that's not a negotiation that's a
capitulation right so we move beyond and
when it is a study that I cite which is
a study that tried to said what are the
predictors of excessive compensation for
CEOs and it turns out that how much you
make as a CEO has very little to do with
the nature of the business that you're
in or with the success of the company
that you run but it has everything to do
with the average compensation of the
members of your compensation board on
your board directors in other words it's
all about the reference point that the
guy is setting your salaries have for
their salaries that's you quality
matters yeah that is a quality matching
yes so there is a kind of the paradigm
gets corrupted again once you move into
these rarefied circles CEO compensation
circles so it's what's funny is how
briefly the market pricing paradigm
rules before it gets corrupted again
maybe there's me it is clearly a kind of
cyclical process in which we move in the
commercial realm from one of these
paradigms to another depending on the
self-interest of the most powerful party
I discovered that there were tones of
what you said that were similar to the
recent article written about the new
book about sarrish Diaghilev
strangely enough and the power that he
wielded at that time but my question was
really more of one of esthetics and
related to baseball which is how far
does the full quote attributed to Branch
Rickey of which only the latter half is
often cited how far do you think that
affects
things that you've been speaking about
where intelligence and effort combining
at their best equal the residue of
design oh dear that's a difficult
question what what is the what is the
I'm sorry what is the half of that quote
that we often what is there a second
half of that quote that is it's
supposedly when someone when the Dodgers
won the World Series yeah Jackie
Robinson they asked him don't you feel
lucky today and he said luck is what
happens when intelligence and effort
combine at their best luck is the
residue of design oh I see yeah yeah oh
that's interesting I've never I've never
heard that that particular quote Rickey
interesting around the it is it's it is
an interesting question about whether
the integration of the game is a kind of
precursor of of the of the of Midler's
revolution a generation ahead because
once you basically bit-by-bit the notion
of baseball as the kind of private
fiefdom of a set of owners that is run
according to their whims however racist
or they might be is broken down bit by
bit and the first barrier that falls is
you explain to the owner that actually
you are you are obliged to look for
people who are great baseball players
wherever they may come from my teams
they come from places and then the
second thing is you are obliged to pay
them properly right once you have so
there's a kind of there is this
continual process of rationalizing the
terms of the game and we forget how how
appallingly retrograde labor relations
were in that world I mean it's really
quite astonishing even more astonishing
by the way is that Marvin Miller is not
in the Hall of Fame if you remember the
Hall of Fame the criteria for entry to
the Hall of Fame is impact a
contribution contributions made to the
game of baseball there is no one outside
of Babe Ruth and Jackie Robinson and
made a greater contribution to the game
of baseball in the 20th century than
Marvin Miller
they put
announcers into the Hall of Fame guy the
guy who said holy cow is in the Hall of
Fame right Marvin Miller who changed
this I mean and this man is sitting in
his apartment you know up in the on the
east side he's the only guy who didn't
get rich right everybody else made
millions and millions of dollars he
never made more than his Union salary
nor did he ask to make more than is
Union salary when he was asked if he
would serve up on his retirement as an
agent for the players
he said no why because he felt it would
be wrong and a violation of his position
as a union man this is a man who
selflessly served the interests of the
game of baseball wrenched it single
handily into the modern era and how did
they reward him by turning their backs
on him why because to this day the
owners are a retrograde group who
deserve I mean I almost feel there
should be a day every year we're all
Americans boycott the game of baseball
until they come to their senses and put
this man where he belongs which is
alongside the Great's of the game in the
whole thing
thank you um just it seems that the
market model is based off of scarcity
and to what extent do you see a sliding
scale between authority figures market
pricing where if the position of
scarcity changes it's just a new you
know through looking glass version of
authority oh yeah when it goes to what
the I was talking about with the
previous question from that side which
is that these paradigms start to get
really fluid we we sort of cycle through
these different versions and depending
on who is who is in power may I suppose
that is the biggest change what happens
perhaps a better way of explaining the
shift in 1975 is in 1975 the social
relations were set up until then were
settled that is to say we had Authority
ranking and nothing else
and a predictable set of characters at
the top of the system the publisher
ruled right and we knew who they were
and we they were like five houses and
they dictated terms to everybody and
then what happens in 75 is that it's all
up
revs that sometimes the publisher can
rule according to authority ranking or
some other paradigm but sometimes it can
be somebody else and in various times
maybe that's a pure way I think of of
explaining this transition that we've we
simply that in terms of open negotiation
it is not simply the money at being paid
that's up for grabs it's also the model
we're going to use to decide how the
money is being paid that's up for grabs
that's a better way to rephrase it sure
um I'm sorry your parents couldn't be
here today I am too I hope they're well
they're very well they're they just
decided I think there's a certain point
when they know where this is headed
right so they're like you know how many
of these talks can be realistically be
asked to attend um so I found out
recently that we have a common ancestor
um John Ford oh my goodness
and when I posted on Facebook oh I'm
gonna go see cousin Malcolm someone told
me about the PBS documentary faces of
America and I got to read your chapter
and I was wondering oh thanks for
bringing to light the whole mythology
that I was brought up to believe about
my father's side of the family so thanks
for that I was wondering if you were
going to write any more about that oh um
well I don't know what um I sort of feel
that uh you know you you know those
people who write a memoir and then it
does really well and then they write
another memoir and then they write that
as well so like you know that okay they
come up with a third memoir and so that
the first one spans you know this much
and the second one is like this much and
then the third one is like the time that
elapsed between their previous memoir
there so there are diminishing returns
to any kind of personal writing and I
think I'm at the point of diminishing
returns I think I have clearly exceed
every interesting fact about my family
and my own personal background so it's
best
I think that I move on to more fertile
pastures Thanks thank you um I'm a
public school teacher so when you spoke
of paternalism I immediately thought of
my classroom but then it occurred to me
that the entire New York City school
system of school systems around the
country or in my opinion built still on
paternalism and maybe even some
community sharing and I feel like a lot
of the school reforms that are being
talked about have to do with the market
and I just wanted to see what your
thoughts were on that and if that was a
positive or negative thing yeah I was
such an interesting question
you're right I hadn't thought about it
in that way that there it is
a lot of what is called for better or
worse education reform
you're right is an attempt to bring
market pricing to some corner not the
hope if some crucial piece of the I will
say you know I am in in part I think
those can be very that can be very very
useful or at least I'd be willing to
experiment with it but I also say that
you know the Canadian in May is very
suspicious of attempts to completely
transform public goods into market-based
systems you know the best example of all
this is the continuing nests in the
healthcare system in this country is in
large part due to the fact that we
persist in trying to use a market
pricing model where it's not appropriate
I think I mean Canada we use a what
would it be it would be a communal
sharing model for our healthcare and I
strikes me and most countries do
question country suit and I strike me
that some more appropriate so it
requires you to you know the the reason
that the health care debate in this
country never really got off the ground
is that no one ever took a step back and
examined the social relations paradigm
we were using to organize the reform
what did we want right did we want a
system that that provided every American
with an equal chance for a decent amount
of health care that is a communal
sharing model that was the Canadian
choice now that
means you sacrifice all kinds of other
things the kinds of things you can only
get with market pricing which is really
really high in services for the wealthy
which you can't get in on Canada the
limited access to it doesn't matter how
rich you are if you want to get a
certain kind of access to some
SuperDuper expensive something something
you go to Buffalo right might be the
only circumstance but you go to both
yeah but um I say that is someone is
very fun at Buffalo high but that's a
you know and I think that you you're
right in the sense that as we go through
as we think through what we want to
happen with education I would love us to
have that kind of conceptual discussion
about what paradigm would is most
appropriate I will say that I do not I
believe that the market pricing paradigm
that is used for elite higher education
in this country is completely bankrupt
it's absurd when you're paying 80 grand
to go to NYU I mean that's a failure of
a as the failure of a system right there
so it's a good question
um what do you think explains the the
fact that Americans don't resent
incredibly wealthy obscene level of
wealth thing that you were talking about
and what are the conditions under which
there might be more sanity brought to
CEO level yeah you know insanity I'm
just curious you mentioned that the tax
rate of years yes fascinating the tax
rate thing is actually is so bizarre so
think about it the top rate income tax
rate in through the early 60 through the
candy Johnson tax cuts and and actually
through the mid fifties or so is that a
91% on incomes over 200,000 so that
translates that's roughly two million
dollars in today's terms so what they're
saying back then was you can't make more
than two million dollars right as a
society this country in the mid 50's
said you can't make in today's dollars
you can't make more than two million and
where and what happened as a result of
that well I mean America went through
first of all its greatest period of
economic growth ever it was the
unacknowledged
leader in the united states the social
fabric of this country was with respect
to income inequality fine right I mean
you can't point to something that was
wrong with America the 1950s because
they said you can't make more than 2
million right now what's amazing about
this is if you even bring this up now
people don't even believe you that that
was in place 50 years ago Adam gopika at
the New Yorker did this town hall thing
in May so disastrous Adam and I so every
night again we do these things that we
we do we did it at the 92nd Street Y
right we get on stage a really Yap about
stuff now we're used to the 92nd Street
Y which is all you know what that
audience is right I'm sure it's a lot
like the audience here so at the 92nd
Street Y you can talk about how taxes in
1950 were 90% and you can talk about
whether that was you know with that mint
in blood over so we were invited to do a
similar kind of thing in Naples Florida
I I did not know but maples floor
I thought Naples Florida was a kind of
extension of the Upper East Side of the
Upper West Side how wrong I was so here
we are up on stage me and Adam mmm
forget that you know it's like and we
bring this up and people started kissing
me properly
I think hurl they're kind of dinner buns
at us I mean it was like I was like
women we make this up this happened
you're here was a room full of kind of
Republican retired millionaires right
their parents paid that kind of tax rate
and maybe they are upset about it but
they didn't form a tea party and jump up
and down about how they were doing turn
into socialists they understood that
their country had given them and men an
enormous contribution to them had made
it possible for them to succeed they
also understood that their country had
incurred certain obligations that had to
be paid for and that as the wealthiest
people in the country they were the ones
best positioned to help pay for that and
by the way two million dollars is a lot
of money but you can actually live a
nice life on two million right it's only
today that we have completely abandoned
sense of proportion and you know people
like this is the most extraordinary
quote it was from Stephen Schwarzman the
private equity who remembers this this
is a guy who made about it I don't know
a billion dollars last year and a member
because and my accountant is here he can
correct me if I'm wrong
Don Cartman come on Stephen Schwarzman
pays capital gains on his money because
he says the money he takes out of his
investment pool his capital gains and
not income so he pays 15% on not 40%
right when there was some move in
Congress to raise that to make him pay
normal taxes right remember he compared
it either to Kristallnacht or the Nazi
invasion of Poland which is by the way
the most obscene thing ever to come out
of anyone on Wall Street's mouth in the
last ten years and by the way the bar is
really high for most obscene thing right
that is how when people are saying that
with a straight face you realize that
we're just completely off the rails
right I feel like I want to put him in a
time machine move him back to 1955 and
sit down with him as he files his tax
return I think that having just knighted
I would pay a billion dollars for that
privilege sure so how did how did a
Miller connect with the Baseball Union I
mean from your talk it seemed like the
players were somewhat were I'm not happy
but we're okay with the situation and
kind of like Miller came in and opened
their eyes but how did he actually get
to the dog was there a grief players who
asked him did he did he apply it's a
it's a great story so Miller is he's
this senior guy at the steelworkers and
he's very well-respected in the in the
union movement a labor movement and the
players are shopping first understand
that they have a problem but their
problem they're concerned about very
very narrowly with their pension they
think the owners are trying to screw
them on the pension and they understand
that as presently constituent constitute
can stitch you whatever they can't they
don't they don't trust them they don't
think they have the organization
necessary to protect the pensions
they're looking for new leadership and
as a guy called cannon
hoo-wee
is basically a he's the is the owners
person he's the owners stooge and the
owners are trying to push Canada on the
players and a couple of them I forgotten
the names but some of the most of
interesting players of that here a
smarter poser I've become suspicious of
Canada and so I'm looking for outside
candidates interestingly enough the
first outside name they come up with is
Richard Nixon and when they first
approached and then anything I don't
know maybe Richard Nixon we better as
the general counsel the players union
because remember this is 66 he's
practicing at Mudros in on Wall Street
he's not yet run for president so they
go to Miller he could imagine they go to
middle and I say we would like you to be
the head of the Players Union and we'd
like your general counsel to be Richard
Nixon now from what I've told you about
Marvin Miller you can guess his feelings
about Richard Nixon right they're not
warm and fuzzy so he said to them very
very flatly that's not going to happen
but you've got to have me or you're
going to have Nixon but so they were but
there was a kind of they had no idea
what they were getting into they were
and they were simply thinking about
pension hadn't made the kind of leave
this is incredibly serendipitous from
their standpoint this incredibly
serendipitous hire trick I think one of
the people behind it was Jim Bunning
who's Nelson is right from Kentucky
that's Republican yeah
by the way up I don't know if you ever
asked no or this but what does Miller
think about the world that he kind of
helped usher in the changes because it
seems like the rise of his baseball
using roughly parallels parallels the
collapse of the steel worker Union and
all that movement yeah I don't know the
answer to that question I mean we had a
very long conversation and I don't know
whether he I think I am I see him in a
curious way I see him as being a much
more important figure that I think he
sees himself I think he sees himself as
doing what any Union man would have done
in that situation and I think he thinks
all he did was apply the principles that
have been worked out over the previous
50 years in the trade unionism to a new
field I don't mean there's a there is
something
incredibly kind of self-effacing is in
his understanding of his of his role so
when I kind of pressed him to kind of
connect what he was doing in baseball to
the larger world around him he was
reluctant to make that connection for
that reason I think and and if you read
his book which by the way is it's such a
great book I mean it's just it it is a
marvelous history of that era he never
he doesn't go that he simply confined
himself to the story of the players and
he saw himself as you know his job was
to get the biggest bite at a Capitol on
behalf of his members that's what you do
it for you man right I don't think he
ever kind of goes beyond what one mouse
question and then I will you're the last
well first of all I want to thank you
for all your books they're really
transformational and brilliant and I've
really enjoyed all of them um my
question is totally unrelated to your
topic today night I don't have to ask if
it's that if it's going to shift the
whole then okay you're probably an
appropriate closing note okay well it's
about your observations in blink oh and
you observed in your afterward how the
advent of everything that is thrown at
us through the inner in the internet and
all the information that is thrown at us
now how that inhibits our ability to
quickly make decisions and you can
articulate it much better than I am sure
but probably I'm sure everybody knows
that the premise of blink my question to
you is how can we as educators of
children who are immersed in this this
this lifestyle now is it's a way of life
how can we teach them and remind
ourselves as a matter of fact how to to
to rely on those instincts yeah how do
you turn off the I don't know I mean I
you know if I had an answer to that I
would be I wouldn't be here would I be
there some position of great authority
in power but um when I suppose the the
the the answer is you can we can we
create for people on places of cognitive
refuge other words other are there
places we can create for people where
they can go and be have time for sort of
reflection and and and process the
enormous amount of information they have
accumulated I mean that's the the for
every moment you spend gathering
information I think you ought to spend
at least two moments making sense of it
and in in a perfectly kind of ordered
life those two things are in balance I
think you're right is they've gotten a
little bit up unbalanced and so maybe
sort of on an institutional level you
know whether that means taking teenagers
and you know incarcerate them for a
short period of time kidding but no you
know it's very interesting there's a
lend on this note this is my favorite
random fact from studies of high
achievers there's a wonderful study done
years ago that looked at a whole range
of very very very creative people and
discovered that they're trying to go
what do they have in common the answer
is almost nothing but the one thing they
all had in common many of them was that
an extraordinary number of them were
bedridden with a serious illness during
childhood late childhood or early
adolescence and you know this is sort of
you can say it's a coincidence it means
nothing or you can say they were forced
into a period of extended reflection and
when you are someone who is has the
capacity to be enormous ly creative if
you are if you have been taking in lots
of information for a long time and then
you're forced to go off in some
centrally deprived environment for an
extended period of time
maybe something wonderful comes out of
that of course the first thing I did
when I read that as I tried to find to
think back and was I ever and of course
the answer is No
hoping at at some point I will suffer
debilitating illness that will transfer
me to the next level but thank you